Expand AEAD limits to consider multi-user security. (#3789)
quicwg/base-drafts: draft-ietf-quic-tls.md

discarded.

## Limits on AEAD Usage

This document sets usage limits for AEAD algorithms to ensure that overuse does
not give an adversary a disproportionate advantage in attacking the

> confidentiality and integrity of communications.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
confidentiality and integrity of communications when using QUIC.
```

after any record fails an authentication check. In comparison, QUIC ignores any
packet that cannot be authenticated, allowing multiple forgery attempts.

Endpoints MUST count the number of encrypted packets for each set of keys. If
the number of encrypted packets with the same key exceeds a limit that is
specific to the AEAD in use, the endpoint MUST stop using those keys. If a key

> update is not possible, the endpoint MUST immediately close the connection.

Reviewer: Should an error code specified here? How is the endpoint closing the connection?

Reviewer 2: I think that we need to just stop using the connection and send no more packets.  We probably need to be explicit about that and mention that a stateless reset is the only thing that can be sent thereafter.

An immediate close before reaching the limit might be recommended to avoid the sudden nature of that sort of close.

Author: I took a crack at this, though I don't love the language. Clarifying suggestions would be most welcome!

Applying a limit reduces the probability that an attacker can distinguish the
AEAD in use from a random permutation; see {{AEBounds}}, {{ROBUST}}, and
{{?GCM-MU=DOI.10.1145/3243734.3243816}}.

Endpoints MUST initiate a key update before the number of encrypted packets
reaches the confidentiality limit for the selected AEAD. For AEAD_AES_128_GCM
and AEAD_AES_256_GCM, the confidentiality limit is 2^27 encrypted packets; see
{{gcm-bounds}}. For AEAD_CHACHA20_POLY1305, the confidentiality limit is greater
than the number of possible packets (2^62) and so can be disregarded. For
AEAD_AES_128_CCM, the confidentiality limit is 2^23 encrypted packets; see
{{ccm-bounds}}.

In addition to counting packets sent, endpoints MUST count the number of
received packets that fail authentication during the lifetime of a connection.

> If the number of packets sent or fail authentication within the connection
> (across all keys) exceeds a limit that is specific to the AEAD in use, the
> endpoint MUST immediately close the connection and not attempt to process any
> further packets.  Applying a limit reduces the probability that an attacker can
> successfully forge a packet; see {{AEBounds}}, {{ROBUST}}, and {{?GCM-MU}}.
> 
> A connection MUST be closed if the number of packets that fail authentication
> exceed the integrity limit for the selected AEAD. For AEAD_AES_128_GCM, and the
> integrity limit is 2^54 encrypted or forged packets; see {{gcm-bounds}}.  For
> AEAD_CHACHA20_POLY1305, the limit on number of packets that fail authentication
> is 2^36; see {{AEBounds}}.  For AEAD_AES_128_CCM, the integrity limit is 2^23.5
> forged packets; see {{ccm-bounds}}.

Reviewer: There seems to be some redundancy and some inconsistencies in the text heree, I've tried to clean it up a bit. See if the following is accurate.
```suggestion
If the total number of received packets that fail authentication within the
connection, across all keys, exceeds the integrity limit for the selected AEAD,
the endpoint MUST immediately close the connection and not process any more
packets. For AEAD_AES_128_GCM, the integrity limit is 2^54 forged packets; see
{{gcm-bounds}}. For AEAD_CHACHA20_POLY1305, the integrity limit is 2^36
forged packets; see {{AEBounds}}. For AEAD_AES_128_CCM, the integrity limit
is 2^23.5 forged packets; see {{ccm-bounds}}. Applying this limit reduces the
probability that an attacker can successfully forge a packet; see {{AEBounds}},
{{ROBUST}}, and {{?GCM-MU}}.
```

after any record fails an authentication check. In comparison, QUIC ignores any
packet that cannot be authenticated, allowing multiple forgery attempts.

> Endpoints MUST count the number of encrypted packets for each set of keys. If

Reviewer 3: Can this clarify who is doing the updating? If I've sent 2^27 or received 2^27 do I initiate?

Reviewer 2: This is an existing ambiguity.  And the answer is that either endpoint can do the update.  As updates are symmetric, this isn't a big deal, but you can stumble over each other if you do it poorly.

I haven't implemented this bit yet, but when I did it for TLS, the sender updates at limit-N and the receiver requests an update at limit-M where M < N.  This is because the primary responsibility for the update lies with the sender.  This stops endpoints using the same implementation from doing near-simultaneous updates, which is a little wasteful.  If M for one implementation matches N for another, then you can still get a race.  Of course, QUIC handles simultaneous updates well, so maybe you don't care for that level of sophistication.

than stateless resets. It is RECOMMENDED that endpoints immediately close the
connection with a connection error of type PROTOCOL_VIOLATION before reaching a
state where key updates are not possible.

For AEAD_AES_128_GCM and AEAD_AES_256_GCM, the confidentiality limit is 2^27
encrypted packets; see {{gcm-bounds}}. For AEAD_CHACHA20_POLY1305, the
confidentiality limit is greater than the number of possible packets (2^62) and
so can be disregarded. For AEAD_AES_128_CCM, the confidentiality limit is 2^23
encrypted packets; see {{ccm-bounds}}. Applying a limit reduces the probability
that an attacker can distinguish the AEAD in use from a random permutation; see
{{AEBounds}}, {{ROBUST}}, and {{?GCM-MU=DOI.10.1145/3243734.3243816}}.

In addition to counting packets sent, endpoints MUST count the number of
received packets that fail authentication during the lifetime of a connection.
If the total number of received packets that fail authentication within the
connection, across all keys, exceeds the integrity limit for the selected AEAD,
the endpoint MUST immediately close the connection and not process any more
packets.

> For AEAD_AES_128_GCM, the integrity limit is 2^54 forged packets; see

Reviewer 3: And _256_GCM? I have no idea if it's the same but we should include it one way or another.

Reviewer 2: The limit is much, much higher, for 256-bit keys.  But the analysis below recommends that the same limit apply.

after any record fails an authentication check. In comparison, QUIC ignores any
packet that cannot be authenticated, allowing multiple forgery attempts.

Endpoints MUST count the number of encrypted packets for each set of keys. If
the total number of encrypted packets with the same key exceeds the
confidentiality limit for the selected AEAD, the endpoint MUST stop using those
keys. Endpoints MUST initiate a key update before sending more protected packets
than the confidentiality limit for the selected AEAD permits. If a key update
is not possible or integrity limits are reached, the endpoint MUST stop using

> the connection and only send stateless resets in response receiving packets. It

Reviewer 4: typo: in response to receiving

is RECOMMENDED that endpoints immediately close the connection with a connection

> error of type PROTOCOL_VIOLATION before reaching a state where key updates are

Reviewer 4: I don't think PROTOCOL_VIOLATION makes sense here, the peer did not violate the protocol

Author: We can use `AEAD_LIMIT_REACHED` as Martin suggests below.

not possible.

For AEAD_AES_128_GCM and AEAD_AES_256_GCM, the confidentiality limit is 2^25
encrypted packets; see {{gcm-bounds}}. For AEAD_CHACHA20_POLY1305, the
confidentiality limit is greater than the number of possible packets (2^62) and
so can be disregarded. For AEAD_AES_128_CCM, the confidentiality limit is 2^23.5
encrypted packets; see {{ccm-bounds}}. Applying a limit reduces the probability
that an attacker can distinguish the AEAD in use from a random permutation; see
{{AEBounds}}, {{ROBUST}}, and {{?GCM-MU=DOI.10.1145/3243734.3243816}}.

In addition to counting packets sent, endpoints MUST count the number of
received packets that fail authentication during the lifetime of a connection.
If the total number of received packets that fail authentication within the

> connection, across all keys, exceeds the integrity limit for the selected AEAD,

Reviewer 4: I think this CL might benefit from a paragraph explaining that confidentiality limits and integrity limits are different, and that confidentiality limits are per-key whereas integrity is per-connection.

Author: I took a stab at this. Please feel free to make suggestions or edits as you see fit!

Reviewer 4: New text looks great to me, thanks!

> the endpoint MUST immediately close the connection and not process any more

Reviewer 4: nit: should we say which error to use here?

Reviewer 2: It might make sense to mint a new error code for this (and the above).  AEAD_LIMIT_REACHED might do.

Reviewer: One more error code!

Author: `AEAD_LIMIT_REACHED` works for me!

so can be disregarded. For AEAD_AES_128_CCM, the confidentiality limit is 2^23.5
encrypted packets; see {{ccm-bounds}}. Applying a limit reduces the probability
that an attacker can distinguish the AEAD in use from a random permutation; see
{{AEBounds}}, {{ROBUST}}, and {{?GCM-MU=DOI.10.1145/3243734.3243816}}.

In addition to counting packets sent, endpoints MUST count the number of
received packets that fail authentication during the lifetime of a connection.
If the total number of received packets that fail authentication within the
connection, across all keys, exceeds the integrity limit for the selected AEAD,
the endpoint MUST immediately close the connection with a connection error of
type AEAD_LIMIT_REACHED and not process any more packets.

For AEAD_AES_128_GCM and AEAD_AES_256_GCM, the integrity limit is 2^54 forged
packets; see {{gcm-bounds}}. For AEAD_CHACHA20_POLY1305, the integrity limit is
2^36 forged packets; see {{AEBounds}}. For AEAD_AES_128_CCM, the integrity limit
is 2^23.5 forged packets; see {{ccm-bounds}}. Applying this limit reduces the
probability that an attacker can successfully forge a packet; see {{AEBounds}},

> {{ROBUST}}, and {{?GCM-MU}}.

Reviewer 5: Nit: I wouldn't use "forged" here but rather "invalid". We don't know why they are invalid.

  bound on the number of forged packets that an endpoint can reject before
  updating keys.

o:

: The amount of offline ideal cipher queries made by an adversary.

The analyses that follow rely on a count of the number of block operations
involved in producing each message. For simplicity, and to match the analysis of
other AEAD functions in {{AEBounds}}, this analysis assumes a packet length of

> 2^10 blocks; that is, a packet size limit of 2^14 bytes.

Reviewer: I don't understand how this impacts the analysis, but why is packet size 2^14 bytes? For QUIC, I would suggest that 2^11 ought to be adequate (if a larger packet size is more conservative).

Reviewer 2: We decided that matching the TLS analysis in this regard is best.  Using the larger number is more conservative, so the margins in practice will be better than what we have calculated here.

There is of course the theoretical limit on QUIC packets, which is 2^16 bytes or 2^12 blocks, but as you say, they are mostly much smaller.  There is an existing note about this discrepancy for those running a massive MTU.

Reviewer: Where's the note? Perhaps a pointer to that here would be helpful. Should the integrity/confidentiality limits be made explicit for 2^16-byte packets?

Reviewer 2: Line 1588 (on the new side).  David raised an issue requesting that we provide limits based on an assumption of 2^16 byte packets.  If we do that, we might want to do a split between 2^11 and 2^16 rather than having 2^14.  We should track that on that issue though.

Author: Agreed. I'd prefer if we left the 2^16 limits to a separate issue.

Reviewer 6: When people say 2^11, do they think 1536 bytes? This is indeed a common packet size. The next interesting size are probably in the "jumbo frame" range -- see for example 9001 bytes mentioned for [AWS](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/UserGuide/network_mtu.html#jumbo_frame_instances). That would be 2^14. And then the UDP limit is indeed 2^16.

simplifying assumptions:

- The number of ciphertext blocks an attacker uses in forgery attempts is
bounded by v * l, the number of forgery attempts and the size of each packet (in
blocks).

- The amount of offline work done by an attacker does not dominate other factors
in the analysis.

The bounds in {{?GCM-MU}} are tighter and more complete than those used in
{{AEBounds}}, which allows for larger limits than those described in {{?TLS13}}.

### Confidentiality Limit

For confidentiality, Equation (1) in {{?GCM-MU}} establishes that an attacker
gains a distinguishing advantage between a real and random AEAD algorithm of no
more than:

~~~
((q + v) * l)^2 / 2^128
~~~

For a target advantage of 2^-60, which matches that used by {{!TLS13}}, this
results in the relation:

~~~
(q + v) <= 2^28
~~~

Assuming `v = q`, endpoints cannot protect more than 2^27 packets in a single
connection without causing an attacker to gain an larger advantage than the
target of 2^-60.

### Integrity Limit

For integrity, Theorem (4.3) in {{?GCM-MU}} establishes that an attacker gains
an advantage in successfully forging a packet of no more than:

~~~

> (1 / 2^(8 * n)) + ((2 * v) / 2^2*n) + ((2 * o * v) / 2^(k + n))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(1 / 2^(8 * n)) + ((2 * v) / 2^(2 * n)) + ((2 * o * v) / 2^(k + n))
```
?

Reviewer 2: The only potential problem here is with line length, but this seems better.

Reviewer: ```
this:~ jiyengar$ echo "(1 / 2^(8 * n)) + ((2 * v) / 2^(2 * n)) + ((2 * o * v) / 2^(k + n))" | wc -c
      68
```

Reviewer 2: OK, that's safe (just).

overestimation of the number of operations.

> ## Analysis AEAD_AES_128_GCM and AEAD_AES_256_GCM Usage Limits {#gcm-bounds}

Reviewer 4: Should this be Analysis *of* AEAD_... ?

{{?GCM-MU}} specify concrete bounds for AEAD_AES_128_GCM and AEAD_AES_256_GCM as
used in TLS 1.3 and QUIC. This section documents this analysis using several
simplifying assumptions:

- The number of ciphertext blocks an attacker uses in forgery attempts is
bounded by v * l, the number of forgery attempts and the size of each packet (in
blocks).

- The amount of offline work done by an attacker does not dominate other factors
in the analysis.

The bounds in {{?GCM-MU}} are tighter and more complete than those used in
{{AEBounds}}, which allows for larger limits than those described in {{?TLS13}}.

### Confidentiality Limit

> For confidentiality, Theorum (4.3) in {{?GCM-MU}} establish that - for a single

Reviewer 4: s/establish/establishes/ ?
